For an example of Poisson regression,
we'll use the bad health dataset
from the count package in R.
Let's load the library here.
Load the data and
check the documentation for the dataset.
The badhealth dataset is from a German
health survey in the year 1998.
It records the number of visits to doctors
during the year 1998 for 1,127 patients.
Our two covariants which we'll use
as explanatory variables are badh,
which gives us an indicator variable for
whether the patient claims
to be in bad health or not.
As well as the patient's age.
Again, we can check these sources and
references for
more information about the data.
Let's print out the first
few values of the dataset.
The first column we have
the number of visits to a doctor,
an indicator of whether that patient
considers themselves to have bad health,
and the age of the patient.
It's also a good idea to check.
To make sure we don't
have any missing values.
So, we're going to check using s.na,
which will flag missing values, and
we want to see if there are any of those.
No, there are no missing values.
As usual, let's visualize
this data with the histogram
We'll do bad health number of visits.
And we'll try to do 20 categories here.
As we can see,
number of visits is a positively valued or
at least non-negative valued,
right skewed quantity.
If there are no 0 values for
number visits,
Turns out there are.
Let's count how many of those occur.
We want to see how many of these are 0?
360 out about 1100 have
0 visits to the doctor,
because we can't take the log of 0,
we'll have to omit these
when we create the plot.
We want to plot the jitter so
that they move around off of
the exact number of counts.
The jitter of the log of numvisit against,
A jitter of the age variable.
Where the data will be badhealth,
We're going to subset the data,
for those that have bad health.
Equal to 0, in other words people
that are in good health and
people with numvisit > than 0.
So, this is going to be a plot for
people in good health,
who visited the doctor
more than zero times.
Our x-axis will be age, and our y-axis
will be the logged number of visits.
Here, you can see maybe
a slight general trend,
that as age increases the number
of doctor visits increases.
And now, lets repeat this plot for
people that have badhealth.
And let's make the color of
the plot red to distinguish.
And we need to say point instead of plot.
So, that it'll add to an existing plot.
There are not many red points down here.
A lot of them are up here, so
it looks like being in bad health,
not surprisingly, is associated
with more visits to the doctor.
Because both variables are related
to the number of doctor visits,
any model that we fit should probably
include terms for both variables.
If we believe that the age and
visits relationship is different between
healthy and non healthy populations.
We should also include
an interaction term in the model.
We're going to do that.
We're going to fit the full model here.
And then, we're going to leave
it to you to compare it.
To the simpler additive model.
One modelling option would be
to fit a normal linear model to
the log of the number of
visits as our response.
Or we could transform the number
of visits by some power.
So, that the responds variable
looks more normally distributed.
We already saw one drawback of taking
the log of the number of visits as our
response variable.
You can't take the log of 0.
So, in order to be able to model it,
while keeping all the individuals
who never visited the doctor.
We would have to add a number
maybe a small number like 0.1 to
the response before taking the log.
This is kind of an awkward transformation
because our choice of number to add to
the number of visits is pretty arbitrary.
Instead of using logged number of
visits as our response variable,
let's instead choose
the Poisson linear model.
One major advantage of
the Poisson linear model
is that the log transformation
appears in the link function.
We are taking the log of the mean
rather than the response itself.
You'll be familiar with
the code that follows.
We start our model string
with the likelihood.
Where we iterate i from 1 to
the length of number of visits.
Or you could assign n to be that number.
And for each number of visits for
the ith person,
this will follow a Poisson
distribution with mean lambda sub i.
Lambda sub i is controlled by this link
function and the linear form of the model.
Where we have an intercept,
a coefficient for
badhealth, the value of the badhealth
variable, a coefficient for age,
the value of the ith age and
an interaction coefficient.
To go along with the age
times the bad health.
For a person in good health
this variable will be zero,
which cancels out this entire term.
But, if the person is in bad health this
is a one which makes this interaction
term modify the coefficient for age.
In other words,
the effective age will be different for
people with badhealth
than with good health,
of course we now add prior distributions
to each of this four coefficients.
Let's go ahead and fit this model.
We'll first load the library
as well as the model string.
Then we'll set seed and
create our data for jags.
Let's take a look at the structure
of that really fast.
We did this as a list of
the original badhealth.
DataFrame it creates the list we want
because we use the same names for
the different variables in our model.
The parameters are intercept and
the three coefficients.
Now, let's initialize the model and
run the burning period.
And as you can see, because there's so
many data points,
it takes a few moments to run this.
Then, we can run the simulations for
the samples that we'll keep.
And this runs even slower.
We've skipped ahead to the end.
Also we'll leave it up to you to
run these convergence diagnostics
to make sure that we can trust
these posterior samples.
We should also collect the DIC for
this model.
To get a general idea of
this model's performance,
we can look at predicted
values in residuals as usual.
We'll call this section residuals.
And we'll start with the design matri X.
We'll transform it to be
a matrix from the original data,
badhealth, and
we'll remove the response variable.
We only want the code variance here.
Make sure this is what we want.
Not quite,
we also want the interreaction term, so
let's add that as a third column to X.
We will cbind it to the original X.
So, the original X will
be a cbind with itself.
And with the badhealth data set,
we want to calculate badh times age.
Now, let's see if that's what we want.
The third column is bodhealth times
h which is true in all these cases.
Let's look at the tail.
And again, it's the product of these
two numbers, so this looks good.
We need point estimates of our
coefficients and in this case,
let's try the posterior median
instead of the posterior means.
We'll take these from
the combined simulation.
So, this apply function says apply
to the columns of model csim and
calculate the medians for those columns.
We want to use median here because we're
going to be taking the inverse log or
the exponential function
of these point estimates.
Really this is just another option.
You could have used the mean here.
We'll run those coefficients,
take a look at them.
And of course we'll matrix multiply
these to get our predictions.
First we'll extract the log of lambda
hat which will be our intercept first.
So, let's extract
the intercept plus the design
matrix Matrix multiplied
with the coefficients.
We want the b_badh,
the b_age and the b_interx.
Let's run that.
This evaluated the linear part of
the model for the observations.
But to get back the original lambdas, or
the means of that Poisson distribution,
we have to take the inverse
of the link function.
So, lam_hat will be nn exponentiated
version of log lam_hat.
Finally, we can calculate
the residuals from the predictions.
Resids will come from badhealth$numvisit.
And we'll subtract off the predictions
Let's look at these residuals.
Ordinarily we would be
alarmed by this plot.
The index of the data seems
to have something to do,
with the value of the residual which would
suggest that the data are not independent.
It turns out in this case
that the data were presorted.
They were ordered by
the number of doctor visits.
And so, we won't worry about this plot.
Next, let's plot the predicted
values against the residuals.
Where we want to standardize the x-axis.
And let's look at each
group one at a time.
First, we want to look at
the ones that have bad health.
So, we'll take only
the predictions where badhealth,
badh==0 and
we also want only those residuals as well.
The predictions for which badhealth is 0,
and the residuals for
which bad health in
the original data set is 0.
Next, on top of that plot,
we will add points, Where badhealth is 1.
So, the lambda hats for
which the badhealth indicator is 1.
And the residuals for
And let's change the color
of these points.
Okay, and
we also need to add a y limit for
these because the two groups
have different range.
So let's set the entire
range of the residuals for
our y-axis, now let's run this plot.
On the x-axis we have lambda hat,
the predicted mean of the Poisson.
And on the y-axis we
have the residual value.
Interestingly, the model separated
the predicted number of visits
according to whether or
not the person had bad health.
If the person had bad health, the model
predicts they'll have about six visits.
And if they don't have bad health
the model predicts about two visits.
It looks like this model
isn't performing great.
We have a lot of values here
with really large residuals.
In other words, the number of visits was
much higher than the model predicted for
a lot of these people.
It's not surprising to see that
the variability increases.
As lam_hat increases.
We're using a Poisson likelihood.
And remember that in the Poisson
distribution, the mean and
the variance are the same number.
However, if the Poisson model is correct,
this group of residuals
should have variance about 2.
And this group of residuals
should have variance about six.
Let's test that out.
First, let's take the residuals for
which badhealth is 0.
And we'll calculate the variance
of these residuals.
We expect it to be about two.
Turns out it's about seven.
Now, let's do the same thing for
patients were badhealth equals 1.
We would expect the variance
here to be about six.
It turns out the variance is about 41.
The fact that we observed so
much more variability than we
expected indicates that
either the model fits poorly.
Meaning that the covariance don't explain
enough of the variability in the data.
Or the data are over dispersed for
this plus on likely that we've chosen.
This is a common issue with count data.
If the data are more variable then
the plus on likelihood suggest,
we can look to alternative models for
over dispersed data.
One common alternative is to use
the negative binomial distribution,
which we won't cover here,
but it's good to know about.